Good morrow, Brother Bedford.
God Almighty,
there is some soul of goodnessin things evil,
would men observingly distill itout,
for our bad neighbor makes usearly stirrers,
which is both healthful and goodhusbandry.
Besides, they are our outwardconsciences
and preachers to us all,
admonishing that we should dressus fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey fromthe weed
and make a moral of the devilhimself.
Good morrow, old Sir ThomasErpingham.
A good soft pillow for that goodwhite head
were better than a churlish turfof France.
Not so, my liege.
This lodging likes me better,
since I may say, "Now lie I likea king."
'Tis good for men
to love their present pains uponexample,
so the spirit is eased.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas.
Brothers both, commend me to theprinces in our camp.
Do my good morrow to them,
and anon desire them all to mypavilion.
We shall, my liege.
Shall I attend Your Grace?
No, my good knight.
Go with my brothers to my lordsof England.
I and my bosom must debate awhile,
and then I would no othercompany.
The Lord in heaven bless thee,noble Harry.
God-a-mercy, old heart.
Thou speakest cheerfully.
Qui va la?
A friend.
Discuss unto me, art thouofficer?
Or art thou base, common, andpopular?
I am a gentleman of a company.
Trailest thou the puissant pike?
Even so.
What are you?
As good a gentleman as theemperor.
Then you are a better than theking.
Ah, the king's a bawcock with aheart of gold,
a lad of life, an imp of fame,
of parents good, of fist mostvaliant.
I kiss his dirty shoe, and fromheartstring,
I love the lovely bully.
What is thy name?
Harry le Roy.
Le Roy!
A Cornish name.
Art thou of Cornish crew?
No, I am a Welshman.
Knowest thou Fluellen?
Yes.
Tell him I'll knock his leekabout his pate
upon Saint Davy's day.
Do not you wear your dagger inyour cap that day,
lest he knock that about yours.
Are you his friend?
And his kinsman too.
A figo for thee, then!
Ouch!
I thank you.
God be with you.
My name is Pistol called.
It sorts well with yourfierceness.
Captain Fluellen.
Shh!
In the name of Jesu Christ,speak fewer.
It is the greatest admiration inthe universal world
when the true and aunchient
prerogatives and the laws of thewars
is not kept.
If you would take
the pains but to examine thewars of Pompey the Great,
I warrant you shall find
there is no tiddle-taddle norpibble-pabble
in Pompey's camp.
I warrant you,
you shall find the ceremonies ofthe wars
and the cares of it and theforms of it
and the sobriety of it and themodesty of it
to be otherwise.
Why, the enemy is very loud.
You hear him all night.
If the enemy is an ass and afool
and a prating coxcomb,
is it meet, think you,
that we should also be, lookyou,
an ass and a fool and a pratingcoxcomb?
Shh!
In your own conscience, now?
I will speak lower.
I pray you and beseech you thatyou will.
Though it appear a little out offashion,
there is much care and valor inthis Welshman.
Brother John Bates,
is not that the morning whichbreaks yonder?
I think it be.
But we have no great cause todesire the approach of it.
Ah, we see yonder the beginningof the day.
I do not think we'll ever seethe end of it.
Who goes there?
A friend.
Under what captain serve you?
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.
A good old commander, a mostkind gentleman.
I pray you,
what thinks he of our estate?
Even as men wrecked upon a sand,
that look to be washed off thenext tide.
He hath not told his thought tothe king.
No, nor it is not meet heshould,
for though I speak it to you,
I think the king is but a man asI am.
The violet smells to him as itdoth to me.
The element shows to him as itdoth to me.
All his senses have but humanconditions.
His ceremonies laid by,
in his nakedness, he appears buta man.
And though his affections arehigher mounted than ours,
yet, when they stoop,
they stoop with the like wing.
Therefore, when he sees reasonof fears as we do,
his fears, out of doubt,
be of the same relish as oursare.
Yet, in reason, no man shouldpossess him
with any appearance of fear,
lest he, by showing it, shoulddishearten his army.
He may show what outward couragehe may,
but I believe, as cold a nightas 'tis,
he could wish himself in theThames up to the neck.
And I would he were and I by himat all adventures,
so we were quit here.
By my troth, I will speak myconscience of the king.
I think he would not wishhimself anywhere
but where he is.
Then I would he were here alone.
So he's sure to be ransomed andmany poor men's lives saved.
I dare say you love him not soill
to wish him here alone,
howsoever you speak this to feelother men's minds.
Methinks I could not dieanywhere so contented
as in the king's company,
his cause being just, hisquarrel honorable.
That's more than we know.
Aye, or more than we should seekafter,
for we know enough if we know weare the king's subjects.
If his cause be wrong,
our obedience to the king wipesthe crime of it out of us.
But if the cause be not good,
the king himself hath a heavyreckoning to make,
when all those legs and arms andheads,
chopped off in a battle,
shall join together at thelatter day and cry all,
"We died at--at such a place"--
some swearing,
some crying for a surgeon,
some upon their wives left poorbehind them,
some upon the debts they owe,
some upon their children
rawly left.
I am afeard there are few diewell
that die in a battle,
for how can they charitablydispose of anything
when blood is their argument?
Now if these men do not diewell,
it will be a black matter
for the king that led them toit,
who to disobey were against allproportion
of subjection.
So if a son that is by hisfather
sent about merchandise
do sinfully miscarry upon thesea,
the imputation of hiswickedness, by your rule,
should be imposed upon hisfather that sent him.
Or if a servant under hismaster's command
transporting a sum of money
be assailed by robbers and diein many irreconciled iniquities,
you may call the business of themaster
the author of the servant'sdamnation.
But this is not so.
The king is not bound to answer
the particular endings of hissoldiers,
the father of his son, nor themaster of his servant,
for they purpose not their death
when they purpose theirservices.
Besides, there is no king, behis cause never so spotless,
if it come to the arbitrament ofswords,
can try it out with allunspotted soldiers.
Some peradventure have on them
the guilt of premeditated andcontrived murder;
some of beguiling virgins
with the broken seals ofperjury;
some making the wars theirbulwark
that have before gored thegentle bosom of peace
with pillage and robbery.
Now, if these men have defeatedthe law
and outrun native punishment,
though they can outstrip men,
they have no wings to fly fromGod.
War is his beadle, war is hisvengeance
so that here men are punished
for before-breach of the king'slaws
in now the king's quarrel.
Where they feared the death,they have borne life away,
Where they would be safe, theyperish.
Then if they die unprovided,
no more is the king guilty oftheir damnation
than he was before guilty ofthose impieties
for the which they are nowvisited.
Every subject's duty is theking's,
but every subject's soul is hisown.
Therefore should every soldierin the wars
do as every sick man in his bed,
wash every mote out of hisconscience;
and dying so, death is to himadvantage;
or not dying, the time wasblessedly lost
wherein such preparation wasgained.
And in him that escapes,
it were not sin to think that,making God so free an offer,
He let him outlive that day tosee His greatness
and to teach others how theyshould prepare.
'Tis certain, every man thatdies ill,
the ill upon his own head,
the king is not to answer forit.
I do not desire he should answerfor me,
and yet I determine to fightlustily for him.
I myself heard the king say hewould not be ransomed.
Aye, he said so, to make usfight cheerfully,
but when our throats are cut,
he may be ransomed and we ne'erthe wiser.
If I live to see it,
I'll never trust his word after.
Oh, you pay him, then.
Oh, that's a perilous shot outof an elder-gun
that a poor and a privatedispleasure
can do against a monarch.
You may as well go about to turnthe sun to ice
with fanning in its face with apeacock's feather.
You'll never trust his wordafter.
Come, it is a foolish saying.
Your reproof is something tooround.
I should be angry with you, ifthe time were convenient.
Well, let it be a quarrelbetween us if you live.
I embrace it.
How shall I know thee again?
Give me any gage of thine, and Iwill wear it in my bonnet.
If ever thou darest acknowledgeit,
I will make it my quarrel.
There is my glove.
Give me another of thine.
There.
This will I also wear in my cap,
and if ever you come to me andsay, after tomorrow,
"This is my glove,"
by this hand, I'll take thee abox on the ear.
If ever I live to see it, I willchallenge it.
Thou darest as well be hanged.
Well, I will do it,
though I take thee in the king'scompany!
Keep thy word!
Fare thee well.
Be friends, you English fools,be friends.
We have French quarrels enough,if you could tell how to reckon.
Indeed, the French may lay 20French crowns to 1
they will beat us,
for they bear them on theirshoulders.
But it is no English treason tocut French crowns.
And tomorrow the king himselfwill be a clipper!
Upon the king.
Let us our lives,
our souls,
our debts,
our careful wives,
our children,
and our sins
lay on the king.
We must bear all.
Oh, hard condition,
twin-born with greatness,
subject to the breath of everyfool
whose sense no more can feel buthis own wringing.
What infinite heart's ease mustkings neglect
that private men enjoy?
And what have kings thatprivates have not too
save ceremony,
save general ceremony?
And what art thou,
thou idle ceremony?
What kind of god art thou
that sufferest more of mortalgriefs
than do thy worshippers?
What are thy rents?
What are thy comings in?
Oh, ceremony, show me but thyworth.
What is thy soul of adoration?
Art thou aught else
but place, degree, and form
creating awe and fear in othermen?
Wherein thou art less happy,being feared,
than they in fearing?
What drinkest thou oft, insteadof homage sweet,
but poisoned flattery?
Oh, be sick, great greatness.
Bid thy ceremony give thee cure.
Thinkest thou the fiery feverwill go out
with titles blown fromadulation?
Will it...
give place to flexure and lowbending?
Canst thou, when thou commandestthe beggar's knee,
command the health of it?
No, thou proud dream
that playest so subtly with aking's repose.
I am a king that find thee.
And I know 'tis not the balm,thesceptre, and the ball;
the sword, the mace, the crownimperial;
the intertissued robe of goldand pearl;
the farced title running 'forethe king;
the throne he sits on;
nor the tide of pomp
that beats upon the high shoreof this world--
no, not all these,
thrice-gorgeous ceremony.
Not all these, laid in bedmajestical,
can sleep so soundly as thewretched slave,
who with a body filled andvacant mind
gets him to rest, crammed withdistressful bread,
never sees horrid night,
the child of hell,
but, like a lackey, from therise to set
sweats in the eye of Phoebus andall night sleeps in Elysium.
Next day after dawn
doth rise and help Hyperion tohis horse
and follows so the ever-runningyear,
with profitable labor, to hisgrave.
And but for ceremony,
such a wretch,
winding up days with toil andnights with sleep,
had the forehand and vantage ofa king.
The slave, a member of thecountry's peace,
enjoys it,
but in gross brain little wotswhat watch the king keeps
to maintain the peace,
whose hours the peasant bestadvantages.
My lord.
My lord, your nobles, jealous ofyour absence,
seek through your camp to findyou.
Good old knight,
collect them all together at mytent.
I'll be before thee.
I shall do it, my lord.
Oh, God of battles,
steel my soldiers' hearts.
Possess them not with fear.
Take from them now the sense ofreckoning,
if the opposed numbers plucktheir hearts from them.
Not today, oh, Lord,
oh, not today.
Think not upon the fault
my father made in compassing thecrown.
I Richard's body have interredanew
and on it have bestowed morecontrite tears
than from it issued forced dropsof blood.
500 poor I have in yearly pay,
who twice a day their witheredhands
hold up toward heaven to pardonblood.
And I have built two chantries,
where the sad and solemn priestssing still for Richard's soul.
More would I do,
but all that I can do is nothingworth,
since that my penitence comesafter all,
imploring pardon.
My liege.
My brother Gloucester's voice.
Aye.
I know thy errand.
I will go with thee.
The day,
my friends,
and all things stay for me.
The sun doth gild our armor.
Up, my lords.
Montez a cheval!
My horse, varlet!
Laquais! Ha!
Oh, brave spirit.
Via.
Les eaux et la terre.
Rien puis.
L'air et le feu.
Ciel, Cousin Orleans.
Now, my Lord Constable.
Hark, how our steeds for presentservice neigh.
Mount them and make incision intheir hides
that their hot blood may spin inEnglish eyes
and dout them with superfluouscourage, ha.
What, will you have them weepour horses' blood?
How shall we, then, behold theirnatural tears?
The English are embattled, youFrench peers.
To horse, you gallant princes,straight to horse.
Do but behold yon poor andstarved band,
and your fair show shall suckaway their souls,
leaving them but the shales andhusks of men.
There is not work enough for allour hands,
scarce blood enough in all theirsickly veins
to give each naked curtal ax astain,
that our French gallants shalltoday draw out
and sheathe for lack of sport.
If we but blow on them,
the vapor of our valor willo'erturn them.
Why do you stay so long, mylords of France?
Yon island carrions, desperateof their bones,
ill-favoredly become the morningfield.
Their ragged curtains poorly arelet loose,
and our air shakes them passingscornfully.
The horsemen sit like fixedcandlesticks
with torch-staves in their hand.
And their poor jades lob downtheir heads,
dropping the hides and hips,
the gum down-roping from theirpale-dead eyes,
and in their pale dull mouths,
the gimmal bit lies foul withchewed grass,
dull and motionless.
And their executors, the knavishcrows,
fly o'er them, all impatient fortheir hour.
They have said their prayers,and they stay for death.
Shall we go send them dinnersand fresh suits
and give their fasting horsesprovender,
and after fight with them?
I stay but for my guidon.
Let's away.
The sun is high,
and we outwear the day.
Where is the king?
The king himself
is rode to view their battle.
Of fighting men, they have fullthree-score thousand.
There's five to one.
Besides, they all are fresh.
God's arm strike with us; 'tis afearful odds.
God by you, princes all.
I'll to my charge.
If we no more meet till we meetin heaven,
then, joyfully, my noble Lord ofBedford,
my dear Lord Gloucester,
my good Lord Exeter,
and my kind kinsman,
warriors all, adieu.
Farewell, good Salisbury,
and good luck go with thee.
Farewell, kind lord.
Fight valiantly today.
Yet I do thee wrong to mind theeof it,
for thou art framed of the firmtruth of valor.
He is as full of valor as ofkindness,
princely in both.
Oh, that we now had here
but one 10,000 of those men inEngland
that do no work today.
What's he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmoreland.
No, my fair cousin.
We are marked to die,
we are enow to do our countryloss;
and if to live, the fewer men,the greater share of honor.
God's will.
I pray thee, wish not one manmore.
By Jove, I am not covetous forgold
nor care I who doth feed upon mycost.
It yearns me not if men mygarments wear.
Such outward things dwell not inmy desires.
But if it be a sin to covethonor,
I am the most offending soulalive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not aman from England.
God's peace.
I would not lose so great anhonor
as one man more, methinks, wouldshare from me
for the best hope I have.
Oh, do not wish one more.
Rather proclaim it,Westmoreland, through my host,
that he which hath no stomach tothis fight, let him depart.
His passport shall be made
and crowns for convoy put intohis purse.
We would not die in that man'scompany
that fears his fellowship to diewith us.
This day is called
the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day
and comes safe home
will stand at tiptoe when thisday is named
and rouse him at the name ofCrispian.
He that shall live this day
and see old age
will yearly on the vigil feasthis neighbors
and say, "Tomorrow is SaintCrispian."
Then shall he strip his sleeveand show his scars
and say, "These wounds I had onCrispian's day."
Old men forget,
yet all shall be forgot,
but he'll remember withadvantages
what feats he did that day.
Then shall our names,
familiar in his mouth ashousehold words--
Harry the king,
Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot,
Salisbury and Gloucester--
be in their flowing cups freshlyremembered.
This story shall the good manteach his son.
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'ergo by,
from this day to the ending ofthe world,
but we in it shall beremembered,
we few,
we happy few,
we band of brothers;
for he today that sheds hisblood with me
shall be my brother.
Be he ne'er so vile,
this day shall gentle hiscondition.
And gentlemen in England nowabed
shall think themselves accursedthey were not here
and hold their manhoods cheap
whiles any speaks that foughtwith us
upon Saint Crispin's day.
My sovereign lord,
bestow yourself with speed.
The French are bravely in theirbattles set
and will with all expediencecharge on us.
All things are ready if ourminds be so.
Perish the man whose mind isbackward now.
Thou dost not wish more helpfrom England, coz.
God's will, my liege, would youand I alone,
without more help, could fightthis royal battle.
Why, now thou hast unwished5,000 men,
which likes me better than towish us one.
You know your places.
God be with you all.
Once more, I come to know ofthee,
King Harry,
if for thy ransom thou wilt nowcompound,
before thy most assuredoverthrow,
for certainly thou art so nearthe gulf,
thou needs must be englutted.
Besides, in mercy, the constabledesires thee
thou wilt mind thy followers ofrepentance
that their souls may make apeaceful and a sweet retire
from off these fields, where,wretches,
their poor bodies must lie andfester.
Who hath sent thee now?
The constable of France.
I pray thee, bear my formeranswer back.
Bid them achieve me and thensell my bones.
Good God, why should they mockpoor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell thelion's skin
while the beast lived
was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies
shall no doubt find nativegraves,
upon the which, I trust,
shall witness live in brass ofthis day's work.
Those that leave their valiantbones in France,
dying like men, though buried inyour dunghills,
they shall be famed,
for there, the sun shall greetthem
and draw their honors reeking upto heaven,
leaving their earthly parts tochoke your clime,
the smell whereof shall breed aplague in France.
Let me speak proudly.
Tell the constable
we are but warriors for theworking day.
Our gayness and our gilt are allbesmirched
with rainy marching in thepainful field.
There's not a piece of featherin our host--
good argument, I hope, we willnot fly--
and time hath worn us intoslovenry.
But, by the mass, our hearts arein the trim.
And my poor soldiers tell me,
yet ere night, they'll be infresher robes,
or they will pluck the gay newcoats
o'er the French soldiers' heads
and turn them out of service.
If they do this-- as, if Godplease, they shall--
my ransom then shall soon belevied.
Herald, save thou thy labor.
Come thou no more for ransom,gentle herald,
for they shall have none, Iswear, but these my joints,
which if they have as I willleave 'em them,
shall yield them little, tellthe constable.
I shall, King Harry.
And so fare thee well.
Thou never shalt hear heraldanymore.
I fear thou wilt once more comeagain for a ransom.
My lord, most humbly on my knee,
I beg the leading of the vaward.
Take it,
brave York.
Now, soldiers,
march away!
And how thou pleasest, God,dispose the day.
Yield, cur!
Je pense que vous etes legentilhomme de bonne qualite.
Art thou a gentleman?
What is thy name? Discuss.
Oh, Seigneur Dieu.
Oh, Signieur Dew should be agentleman.
Perpend my words, Oh, SignieurDew, and mark.
Oh, Signieur Dew, thou diest onpoint of fox,
except, oh, Signieur,
you do give to me egregiousransom.
Oh, prenez misericorde.
Ayez pitie de moi.
Est-il impossible d'echapper laforce de ton bras.
Brass, cur?
You damned and luxuriousmountain goat,
offerest thou me brass?
Oh, pardonnez-moi.
What sayest thou so to me?
A ton of moys?
Come hither, boy!
Ask me this slave in French whatis his name.
Ecoutez?
Comment etes-vous appele?
Monsieur le Fer.
He says his name is Master Fer.
Master Fer?
I'll fer him, firk him, andferret him.
Discuss the same in French untohim.
I do not know the French for ferand ferret and firk.
Well, bid him prepare, for Iwill cut his throat.
Que dit-il, Monsieur?
Il me commande a vous dire quevous faites vous pret.
Car ce soldat ici est disposetout a cette heure
de couper votre gorge.
Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy,
peasant, unless you give mecrowns,
brave crowns,
or mangled shalt thou be bythis, my sword.
Oh, je vous supplie, pourl'amour de Dieu,
me pardonner!
Je suis gentilhomme de bonnemaison.
Gardez ma vie, et je vousdonnerai deux cents ecus.
What are his words?
He prays for you to save hislife.
He is a gentleman of good house.
And for his ransom, he will giveyou 200 crowns.
Oui, monsieur.
Tell him my fury will abate,
but I the crowns will take.
Petit monsieur, que dit-il?
Encore qu'il est contre sonjurement
de pardonner aucun prisonnier.
Neanmoins, pour les ecus quevous l'avez promis,
il est content de vous donner laliberte, le franchisement.
Sur mes genoux je vous donnemille remercimens.
Et je m'estime heureux que jesuis tombe entre
les mains d'un chevalier,
je pense, le plus brave,vaillant,
et tres distingue seigneurd'Angleterre!
Merci, monsieur.
Expound unto me, boy.
He gives you, upon his knees, athousand thanks.
And he esteems himself happythat he hath fallen
into the hands of one, as hethinks,
the most brave, valorous,
and thrice-worthy signieur ofEngland.
As I suck blood, I will somemercy show.
Follow me!
Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
I did never know so full a voiceissue from so empty a heart.
But the saying is true,
"The empty vessel makes thegreatest sound."
Bardolph and Nym had ten timesmore valor
than this roaring devil i' theold play,
and they are both hanged.
And so would this be
if he durst steal anythingadventurously.
I must stay with the lackey withthe luggage of our camp.
The French might have a goodprey of us,
if he knew of it,
for there is none to guard itbut boys.
Shame and eternal shame, nothingbut shame!
Oh, let us die in honor.
Once more back again!
And he who will not followBourbon now, let him go hence,
and with his cap in hand, like abase pander,
hold the chamber door whilst bya slave,
no gentler than my dog,
his fairest daughter iscontaminated.
Disorder, that hath spoiled us,friend us now.
Let us on heaps go offer up ourlives.
We are enow yet living in thefield
to smother up the English in ourthrongs
if any order might be thoughtupon.
Oh, the devil take order now.
I'll to the throng!
Let life be short, else shamewill be too long.
Well have we done,thrice-valiant countrymen.
But all's not done.
Yet keep the French the field.
The Duke of York commends him toYour Majesty.
Lives he, good Uncle?
Thrice within this hour, I sawhim down,
thrice up again and fighting.
From helmet to the spur, allblood he was.
In which array, brave soldier,doth he lie, larding the plain.
And by his bloody side,
yokefellow to his honor-owingwounds,
the noble Earl of Suffolk alsolies.
Suffolk first died.
York, all haggled over, comes tohim,
where in gore he lay insteeped,
takes him by the beard,
and kisses the gashes
that bloodily did yawn upon hisface.
He cries aloud, "Tarry, mycousin Suffolk.
"My soul shall thine keepcompany to heaven.
"Tarry, sweet soul, for mine,then fly abreast,
"as in this glorious andwell-foughten field
we--we kept together in ourchivalry."
Upon these words, I came andcheered him up.
He smiled me in the face, raughtme his hand,
and, with a feeble grip, says,"Dear my lord,
commend my service to mysovereign."
So did he turn,
and over Suffolk's neck,
he threw his wounded arm andkissed his lips.
And so espoused to death, withblood,
he sealed a testament ofnoble-ending love.
The pretty and sweet manner ofit
forced those waters from mewhich I would have stopped.
I had not so much of man in me,
and all my mother came into mineeyes
and gave me up to tears.
I blame you not,
for, hearing this,
I must perforce compound withmistful eyes,
or they will issue too.
But hark, what new alarum isthis same?
The French have reinforced theirscattered men.
Then every soldier kill hisprisoners.
Give the word through.
Kill the poys and the luggage!
'Tis expressly against the lawof arms!
'Tis as arrant a piece ofknavery,
mark you now, as can be offered.
In your conscience, is it not?
'Tis certain there's not a boyleft alive.
And the cowardly rascals thatran from the battle
have done this slaughter.
Besides, they have burned andcarried away
all that was in the king's tent.
Wherefore the king, mostworthily,
hath caused every soldier to cuthis prisoner's throat.
Oh, 'tis a gallant king.
Aye, he was born at Monmouth,Captain Gower.
What call you the name of thetown
where Alexander the Pig is born?
Alexander the Great.
Why, I pray you, is pig notgreat?
The pig or the great or the hugeor the mighty
or the magnificence?
It's all one reckoning,
save the phrase, a littlevariation.
I think Alexander the Great wasborn at Macedon.
His father was called Philip ofMacedon,
as I take it.
I think it is in Macedon whereAlexander is born.
I tell you, Captain,
if you look in the maps of the'orld,
I warrant you shall find
in the situations betweenMacedon and Monmouth
that the situations, look you,is both alike.
There is a river in Macedon.
There is also moreover a riverat Monmouth,
the Wye at Monmouth.
But it is out of my brains
what is the name of the otherriver.
But it is all one,
such as my fingers is to myfingers,
and there is salmons--
mm--
in both.
Oh, shh.
If you mark Alexander's lifewell,
Harry of Monmouth's life
is come after it indifferentwell,
for there is figures in allthings.
Alexander, God knows and youknow,
in his rages and his wraths
and his cholers and his moodsand his displeasures
and his indignations and alsobeing
a little intoxicates in hisbrains,
did, in his ales and his angers,kill his best friend, Cleitus.
Our king is not like him inthat.
He never killed any of hisfriends.
It is not well done, mark younow,
to take the tales out of mymouth
ere it is made and finished.
I speak but in the figures andcomparisons of it.
As Alexander did kill his friendCleitus,
in his ales and in his cups,
so also Harry Monmouth,
being in his right wits and hisgood judgments,
turned away the fat knight withthe great belly doublet.
He was full of jests and gipesand mocks and knaveries.
Oh, I forgot his name now.
Sir John Falstaff.
That is he.
I'll tell you, Captain,
there is good men born atMonmouth.
Here comes His Majesty.
I was not angry since I came toFrance
until this instant.
Take a trumpet, herald.
Ride thou unto the horsemen onyond hill.
If they will fight with us,
bid them come down or void thefield.
They do offend our sight.
If they'll do neither,
we'll come to them and make themskirr away,
as swift as stones enforced fromthe old Assyrian slings.
Besides, we'll cut the throatsof those we have,
and not a man of them that weshall take
shall taste our mercy!
Go and tell them so.
Here comes the herald of theFrench, my liege.
How now.
What means this, herald?
Comest thou again for ransom?
No, great king.
I come to thee for charitablelicense,
that we may wander o'er thisbloody field
to book our dead and then tobury them,
to sort our nobles from ourcommon men,
for many of our princes-- woethe while--
lie drowned and soaked inmercenary blood.
So do our vulgar drench theirpeasant limbs
in blood of princes,
and their wounded steeds fretfetlock deep in gore
and with wild rage
yerk out their armed heels attheir dead masters,
killing them twice.
Oh, give us leave, great king,to view the field in safety
and dispose of their deadbodies.
I tell thee truly, herald,
I know not if the day be ours orno,
for yet a many of your horsemenpeer and gallop o'er the field.
The day is yours.
Praised be God,
and not our strength, for it.
What is this castle called thatstands hard by?
They call it Agincourt.
Then call we this the field ofAgincourt,
fought on the day of CrispinCrispianus.
Your grandfather of famousmemory--
an't please Your Majesty--
and your great-uncle Edward, theBlack Prince of Wales,
as I have read in thechronicles,
fought a most famous battle herein France.
They did, Fluellen.
Your Majesty says very true.
If Your Majesties is rememberedof it,
the Welshmen did good service
in the garden where leeks didgrow,
wearing leeks in their Monmouthcaps,
which, Your Majesty know, tothis hour
to be an honorable badge of theservice.
And I do believe Your Majestytakes no scorn
to wear the leek upon SaintTavy's day.
I wear it for a memorable honor,
for I am Welsh, you know, goodcountryman.
All the water in Wye cannot wash
the Welsh blood out of YourMajesty's body,
I can tell you that!
God bless it and preserve it
as long as it pleases His Graceand His Majesty too!
Thanks, good my countryman.
By Jeshu, I am Your Majesty'scountryman!
I care not who know it!
I will confess it to all the'orld!
I need not be ashamed of YourMajesty, praised be God,
as long as Your Majesty is anhonest man.
God keep me so.
Our herald go with him,
and bring me just notice of thenumbers dead
on both our parts.
Call yonder fellow hither.
Soldier, you must come to theking.
Soldier, why wearest thou thatglove in thy cap?
Oh.
An't please Your Majesty,
it is the gage of one I shouldfight withal,
if he be alive.
An Englishman?
An't please Your Majesty,
a rascal that swaggered with melast night,
who, if ever dare challenge thisglove,
I have sworn to take him a boxo' the ear.
Or if I should see my glove inhis cap--
which he swore, as he were asoldier,
he would wear if alive--
I will strike it out soundly.
What think you, CaptainFluellen?
Is it fit this soldier keep hisoath?
He is a villain and a craven,
an't please Your Majesty, in myconscience.
Then keep thy vow, sirrah, whenthou meetest the fellow.
So I will, my liege, as I live.
Who servest thou under?
Under Captain Gower, my liege.
Call him hither to me, soldier.
Oh, I will, my liege.
Here, Fluellen.
Wear thou this favor for me andstick it in thy cap.
When Alencon and myself weredown together,
I plucked this glove from hishelm.
If any man challenge this,
he is a friend to Alencon and anenemy to our person.
If thou encounter any such,apprehend him,
an thou dost me love.
Your Grace does me
as great honors as can bedesired
in the hearts of his subjects.
I fain see the man that hath buttwo legs
that shall find himselfaggrieved at this glove.
That is all.
But I'd fain see it once,
an please God of His grace thatI might see.
Knowest thou Gower?
Oh, he is my very dear friend,an please you.
Pray thee, go seek him, andbring him to my tent.
I will fetch him.
My Lord of Warwick and mybrother Gloucester,
follow Fluellen closely at theheels.
Go you with me, Uncle Exeter.
I warrant it is to knight you,Captain.
God's will and his pleasure,Captain,
you must come apace to the king.
There is more good toward youperadventure
than is in your knowledge todream of.
Sir,
know you this glove?
Know the glove?
I know a glove is a glove.
Hmm.
I know this,
and therefore, I challenge it!
'Sblood!
An arrant a traitor as any is inthe universal world
or in France or in England!
How now, sir!
You villain.
Do you think I'll be forsworn?
Stand aside, Captain Gower!
I'll give his treason paymentinto plows, I warrant you!
I am no traitor!
That's a lie in thy throat!
I charge you in His Majesty'sname,
apprehend him!
He's a friend of the DukeAlencon's!
How now, how now.
What's the matter?
My Lord of Warwick, here is avillain,
and a contagious treason come tolight
as you shall desire in asummer's day.
Here is His Majesty.
How now, what's the matter?
My liege, here is a villain anda traitor
that has struck the glove
which Your Majesty
is take out of the helmet ofAlencon.
My liege, this was my glove.
Here is the fellow to it,
and he that I gave it to incharge
promised to wear it in his cap.
I promised to strike him if hedid.
I met this man with my glove inhis cap,
and I have been as good as myword.
Your Majesty hear now, savingYour Majesty's manhood,
what an arrant, rascally,beggarly, lousy knave it is.
I hope Your Majesty will bear mewitness and testament
and will avouchment
that this is the glove ofAlencon
which Your Majesty is give me.
In your conscience, now.
Give me thy glove, soldier.
Look, here is the fellow of it.
'Twas I, indeed, thou promisedstto strike.
And thou hast given me mostbitter terms.
Let his neck answer for it, anplease Your Majesty,
if there is any martial law inthe world.
How canst thou make mesatisfaction?
All offences, my lord, come fromthe heart.
Never came any from mine tooffend Your Majesty.
It was ourself thou didst abuse.
Your Majesty came not likeyourself.
You appeared to me but as acommon man.
Witness the night,
your garments, your lowliness,
and what Your Highness sufferedunder that shape,
I beseech you take for your ownfault and not mine,
for had you been as I took youfor,
I made no offence.
Therefore, I beseech YourHighness,
pardon me.
Here, Uncle Exeter.
Fill this glove with crowns,
and give it to this fellow.
Keep it, fellow,
and wear it for an honor in thycap
till I do challenge it.
Give him the crowns.
And, Captain, you must needs befriends with him.
By this day and this light,
the fellow hath enough mettle inhis belly.
Hold.
Here is, ah, 12 pence for you.
And I pray you to serve God
and keep you out of prawls
and prabbles and quarrels anddissensions,
I warrant you, it is the betterfor you.
I will none of your money.
Oh, come, it is with a goodwill.
It will serve to mend yourshoes.
Come, wherefore be you sobashful, huh?
Your shoes is not so good.
'Tis a good shilling.
Hmm?
Or I will change it.
Now, herald, are the deadnumbered?
Here is the number of theslaughtered French.
What prisoners of good sort aretaken, Uncle?
Charles, Duke of Orleans, nephewto the king.
John, Duke of Bourbon.
Lord Bouciqualt.
Of other lords, barons, knights,and squires,
full 1,500, besides common men.
This note doth tell me of 10,000French
that in the field lie slain.
Princes in this number andnobles bearing banners,
there lie dead 126.
Added to these, of knights,esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
8,400;
of the which, 500 were butyesterday dubbed knights;
so that in these 10,000 theyhave lost,
there are but 1,600 mercenaries.
The rest are princes, barons,lords, knights, and squires,
gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their noblesthat lie dead.
Charles Delabreth, HighConstable of France.
Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral ofFrance.
The master of the crossbows,Lord Rambures.
Great Master of France, thebrave Sir Guichard Dolphin.
John, Duke of Alencon.
Anthony, Duke of Brabant.
That's the brother to the Dukeof Burgundy.
And Edward, Duke of Bar.
Of lusty earls, Grandpre andRoussi,
Fauconbridge and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle,
Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Here was a royal fellowship ofdeath.
Where is the number of ourEnglish dead?
Edward, the Duke of York.
The Earl of Suffolk.
Sir Richard Ketly.
Davy Gam, Esquire.
None else...
of name.
And of all other men but 5 and20--
Oh, God, Thy arm was here.
And not to us, but to Thy armalone,
ascribe we all.
When, without stratagem,
but in plain shock and even playof battle,
was ever known so great andlittle loss
on one part and on the other?
Take it, God, for it is none butThine.
'Tis wonderful.
Come, go we in procession to thevillage.
And be it death proclaimedthrough our host
to boast of this or take thatpraise from God
which is His only.
Is it not lawful, an please YourMajesty,
to tell how many is killed?
Yes, Captain.
But with this acknowledgment,
that God fought for us.
Yes, my conscience, He did usgreat good.
Do we all holy rites.
Let there be sung, "Non nobis teDeum,"
the dead with charity enclosedin clay,
and then to Calais
and to England then,
and where ne'er from Francearrived more happy men.
Vouchsafe to those that have notread the story,
that I may prompt them.
And of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit theexcuse of time,
of numbers and due course ofthings,
which cannot in their huge andproper life
be here presented.
Now we bear the king towardCalais.
Grant him there.
There seen, heave him away uponyour winged thoughts
athwart the sea.
Behold, the English beach palesin the flood with men,
with wives and boys,
whose shouts and claps out-voicethe deep-mouthed sea,
which like a mighty whiffler'fore the king
seems to prepare his way.
So let him land, and solemnlysee him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thoughtthat even now
you may imagine him uponBlackheath,
where that his lords desire him
to have borne his bruised helmet
and his bended sword before himthrough the city.
He forbids it,
being free from vainness andself-glorious pride,
giving full trophy, signal, andostent
quite from himself to God.
But now behold,
in the quick forge and workinghouse of thought,
how London doth pour out hercitizens.
The mayor and all his brethrenin best sort,
like to the senators of theantique Rome
with the plebeians swarming attheir heels,
go forth and fetch theirconquering Caesar in.
As, by a lower but lovinglikelihood,
were now the general of ourgracious empress,
as in good time he may, fromIreland coming,
bringing rebellion broached onhis sword,
how many would the peaceful cityquit,
to welcome him.
Much more and much more causedid they this Harry.
Now in London place him.
As yet the lamentations of theFrench
invites the king of England'sstay at home--
the emperor's coming in behalfof France
to order peace between them--
and omit all the occurrences,whatever chanced,
till Harry's back return againto France.
There must we bring him,
and myself have played theinterim
by remembering you 'tis past.
Then brook abridgment,
and your eyes advance after yourthoughts,
straight back again to France.
Nay, that's right.
But why wear you your leektoday?
Saint Davy's day is past.
There is occasions and causeswhy and wherefore in all things.
I will tell you as my friend,Captain Gower.
The rascally, scald, beggarly,lousy, pragging knave, Pistol,
which you and yourself and allthe world know
to be a man of no merits,
he is come to me yesterday andbrings me bread and salt
and bids me eat my leek.
It was in a place
where I could bear no contentionwith him.
But I'll be so bold as to wearmy leek in my cap
till I see him again,
and then I will tell him alittle piece of my desires.
Here he comes, swelling like aturkey-cock.
'Tis no matter for his swellingsnor his turkey-cocks.
God bless you, Aunchient Pistol!
You scurvy, lousy knave, Godbless you.
Ha!
Art thou bedlam?
Would'st thou have me fold upParca's fatal web?
Hence.
I am qualmish at the smell ofleek.
I beseech you heartily, scurvy,lousy knave,
at my requests and my petitionsand my desires
to eat, look you, this leek,
because, look you, you do notlove it,
nor your affections and yourappetites
and your digestions does notagree with it,
I would desire you therefore toeat it.
Not for Cadwallader and all hisgoats.
Ow!
Ah!
There is one goat for you.
Oh!
Will you be so good, scaldknave, as eat it?
Base Troyan, thou shalt die.
You say very true, scald knave,when God's will is.
I will desire you to live in themeantime
and eat your victuals.
Come, there is sauce for it.
Ow!
Bite, I pray you.
It's good for your green woundand your bloody coxcomb.
Must I bite?
Yes, certainly, out of doubt
and out of question too
and ambiguities.
By this leek, I will be mosthorribly revenged.
I eat--I eat, I swear!
Eat, I pray you.
Will you have some more sauce toyour leek?
I have another leek in mypocket.
There's not enough leek to swearby.
Quiet thy cudgel!
Thou dost see I eat.
Much good do you, heartily,scald knave.
Oh, no, throw none away.
The skin is good for your brokencoxcomb.
God be wi' you and keep you
and heal your pate.
Doth Fortune play the huswifewith me now?
News have I that my Nell is deadi' the spital
of malady of France.
And there, my rendezvous isquite cut off.
Old I do wax.
And from my weary limbs, honoris cudgelled.
Well, bawd I'll turn
and something lean to cutpurseof quick hand.
To England will I steal,
and there, I'll steal.
And patches will I get untothese scars,
and say I got them in the Galliawars.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.